[Applause]
I have great pleasure in welcoming the
prime minister of the Republic of India
his Excellency Narendra Modi and I
invite him to address the assembly Mr
Prime Minister it was a historic day
when prime minister Narendra Modi
addressed the United Nations General
Assembly the world decided to honor the
Glorious practice of yog by giving it
formal International
[Music]
recognition Karm
y
[Music]
SE
y
[Music]
yog is essentially a spiritual
discipline based on extremely subtle
science it is an art and science for
Healthy
Living the word yog is derived from the
Sanskrit word yug meaning to join or
Unite
[Music]
according to yogic
scriptures the practice of yog leads to
the union of the individual
Consciousness with that of the universal
Consciousness indicating a perfect
balance between mind and body man and
nature the science of yog has its or
Origins thousands of years ago before
the first religions or belief systems
were born in Yogi L shiv the first Yogi
or ADI Yogi transmitted his profound
knowledge to his seven disciples the
famous saptarishis or the seven sages
yog was practiced through the previc
period
but it was Maharishi patanjali known as
the father of modern yog Who
systematized and codified the then
practices through his yog sutras later
many yog Masters contributed to the
preservation and development of yog and
the spreading of this wonderful
practice there are different schools of
yog these include G
yog B yog Karma yog panala
yog yog Kundalini yogana yog Mantra yog
Lea yog J yog bodha yog
Etc each school has its own approach and
practices that lead to the ultimate aims
and objectives of yog
some of the widely practiced yoga
sadhanas are
Yama
[Music]
aayara
DH
sadii B and
mudra
shatas
Yahara Mantra japa
yuk
Karma a yoga practitioner should follow
the guiding principles while performing
Yogi
practices before practice yogic practice
should be performed in a calm and quiet
atmosphere with a relaxed body and mind
it should be done on an empty stomach or
light stomach consume a small amount of
honey in lukewarm water if you feel weak
light and comfortable cotton clothes are
preferred to facilitate easy movement of
the
body in case of chronic diseases or pain
or cardiac problems a physician or a
yoga therapist should be consulted prior
to performing yogic
practices during practice practice
sessions should start with a prayer or
invocation as it creates a conducive
environment to relax the mind
yogic practices shall be performed
slowly in a relaxed manner with
awareness of the body and
breath do not hold the breath unless it
is specially mentioned to do
so do not hold the body tightly or jerk
the body perform the practices according
to your own capacity end the session
with deep silence or Shanti
part food or a bath may be taken only 20
to 30 minutes after
practice welcome to the world of
yog welcome to the world of wisdom that
is as relevant and beneficial today as
it was thousands of years ago
[Applause]
[Music]
oh
oh oh
[Music]
[Applause]
s
[Music]
[Applause]
s
[Music]
welcome to the world of
yoga let us start yog sadhana with
chalana crias or loosening practices to
increase micro
circulation neck exercises forward and
back backward neck
bending stand in an alert
posture keep feet comfortably apart and
your arms on the
waist
exhale and bend head forward slowly and
try to touch the chin to the chest
inhale move the head as far back as is
comfortable and come back with
inhalation
[Music]
right and left neck
bending exhale bend the head slowly to
the right bring the ear as close as
possible to the shoulder inhale bring
the head to normal position exhale bend
the head to the left side inhale bring
the head up to normal
position right and left
twisting exhale gently ly turn the head
to the right side so that the chin is in
line with the
shoulder inhale bring the head to the
normal
position
exhale turn the head to the left
side inhale and bring the head to the
normal
position neck
rotation bend the head forward trying to
touch the chin to the chest inhale
slowly rotate the head clockwise
while coming down
exhale rotate the head in anticlockwise
Direction feel the stretch around the
neck and loosening up of the joints and
muscles of the neck and release of
tension in the neck people with neck
pain and spondilitis should do the
practice
[Music]
gently trunk
twisting keep the legs about 2 ft apart
raise both the arms up to chest level
with the Palms facing each
other exhale twist the body towards the
right side so that the left palm touches
the right
shoulder come back with
inhalation now exhale twist the body
towards the left side so that the right
palm touches the left
shoulder come back with
inhalation repeat do slowly with
[Music]
breathing avoid this practice in case of
vertebral and dis disorders and during
menstruation relax in standing
[Music]
posture knee
movements inhale lift your arms up at
the shoulder
level exhale bend the knees and bring
down your body to the squatting position
inhale and straighten the
body repeat two more
times this practice strengthens the
knees and hip
joints avoid this in case suffering from
acute arthritis exhale while Bringing
Down the
hands now let let us move to
yogasana tasan Tar means palm
tree keep your feet 2 in apart interlock
the
fingers and turn the wrist
outwards inhale raise the arms up and
bring them in line with the shoulders
raise the heels off the floor and
balance on the
toes stay in this position for 10 to 15
seconds this Asen brings stability in
the body helps to clear up congestion of
the spinal nerves corrects faulty
posture exhale bring the heels Down
release the interlock of the fingers and
bring the arms down parallel to the
trunk and come back to a standing
posture
vasana Vick means
tree stand with the feet 2 in apart
focus on a point in front exhale bend
the right leg and place the foot on the
inside of the left thigh the heel should
be touching the
perenium inhale and extend the arms
up and join the Palms stay in this
position for 10 to 15 seconds and
breathe normally this improves
neuromuscular coordination endurance and
alertness avoid this practice in case of
arthritis and obesity exhale and bring
the arms and right foot
[Music]
down and repeat the Asen bend the left
leg and place the foot on the right
thigh the heel should touch the
perenium inhale
extend the arms up and join the
[Music]
Palms
relax pad hastasana
[Music]
p means foot hasta means
hand inhale slowly and raise the arms
up stretch up the body from the
waist exhale and Bend forward until the
entire Palm rests on the
ground maintain this final posture for
10 to 30 seconds those who have a stiff
back should bend according to their
capacity now inhale come up slowly to
the vertical position and stretch the
arms above the head exhale and slowly
return to the starting position in
reverse
order
relax AR
[Music]
chakran support the back at the waist
exhale drop the head backwards stretch
the neck muscles and bend backwards from
the lumber
region relax with normal breathing stay
there for 10 to 30
seconds ARA chakra makes the spine
flexible and strengthens the spinal
nerves and improves breathing
capacity inhale and slowly come up and
relax
relax hypertensive patients shall Bend
with
[Music]
care
tronas trone means
triangle stand with your feet
comfortably apart slowly raise both the
arms sideways till they are
horizontal
exhale slowly Bend to the right side and
place the right hand just behind the
right foot the left arm is straight up
in line with the right arm remain in
this posture for 10 to 30 seconds with
normal
breathing this prevents flat foot
strengthens the calf thigh and waist
muscles makes the spine
flexible as you inhale slowly come
up repeat for the left
side avoid this posture in case of
slipped dis
sha and after undergoing abdominal
surgery do not go beyond your
[Music]
limits
padas let us now get ready for sitting
postures bhadran bhadra means firm sit
erect with the legs stretched out
straight in front keep the hands beside
the hips this is
dandasan now put the soles of your feet
together exhale and clasp your hands
together over your
toes pull your heels as close as
possible up to the perenium
region this is the final position stay
here for some time
[Music]
badran keeps the body firm and
stabilizes the
mind now stretch your leg and come to
Vasan avoid this practice in case of
severe arthritis and chatica
[Music]
arasan usra means
camel come to dandas
fold your legs and sit on your
heels keep the thighs close and the big
toes touching place the hands on the
knees this is vajras now let us start
arasan
inhale and rise and stand on your
knees exhale keep your palms on the hips
with fingers pointing
downwards keep the elbow and shoulder
parallel bend the head back and stretch
the neck muscles inhale and bend the
trunk backwards as much as is
comfortable exhale and relax this is the
final position
now inhale and come
up exhale put your hands down and sit in
vajras avoid this Asen during abdominal
injuries vertigo and
[Music]
pregnancy Shashank
aam Shashank means hair spread both the
knees wide
apart keep the toes touching
keep the Palms between the
knees exhale and slowly stretch them
full length Bend forward and place the
chin on the ground keep the arms
parallel look in front and maintain the
posture this helps to reduce stress and
anger inhale and come
up exhale and come back to
vajras stretch your legs back to
[Music]
Vasan patients with osteoarthritis
should do this with
[Music]
caution
Vasan vakra means
Twisted bend the right leg and place the
right foot beside the left knee bring
the left arm around the right knee and
place the Palm beside the right foot
exhale twist the body and neck to the
[Music]
right comfortably remain in this
posture turn your head back take out
your hands with
exhalation stretch your
legs now come back and relax in visham
as this Asen increases flexibility of
the spine it helps to overcome
constipation dyspepsia and in the
management of
diabetes repeat the same on the other
side
[Music]
turn your head back take out your hands
with
exhalation stretch your
legs now come
back and relax in Vish
[Music]
Asana
pangana now let us be ready for prone
postures puang puang means snake or
cobra
lie down on your stomach rest your head
on your hands and relax the
body now join your
legs and stretch your
arms keep the forehead on the
ground keep your palms beside the
chest and raise the elbows inhale lift
the chin and chest up to the naval
region
this is puang
assen this Asen is best for Stress
Management it also helps to manage
backache and bronchial
problems
exhale rest your forehead on the
ground and stretch your
arms spread your
[Music]
legs place your palms and rest your head
on the palms and relax
[Music]
shasan Shala means a locust lie down on
your stomach now join your
legs rest the chin on the floor keep
both hands beside the body Palms facing
upwards inhale raise the legs off the
floor as much as you can without bending
the
knees extend the arms and legs well to
ease the lift of the body off the floor
stay in this position
comfortably this Asen helps in
sha and lower back eg it tones the hip
muscles now exhale bring the legs down
towards the
floor take out your
arms and rest on the floor cardiac
patients should avoid this posture
[Music]
makarasana Maka means
crocodile lie down on your stomach with
the feet wide apart feet pointing
outward rest your head on your hands
relax this is
makarasana this ASA is practiced for
relaxation in all prone
postures it promotes relaxation of the
lower back
suub
basan Now we move to supine postures
suub bandas suub band means formation of
a
bridge join your legs keep the arms
beside the body Bend both the legs at
the knees and bring the heels near the
buttocks hold both the ankles
firmly inhale
slowly raise your buttocks and trunk up
as much as you can to form a
bridge remain
comfortably this is the final
position this ARA relieves depression
and
anxiety it strengthens the lower back
muscles now
exhale slowly return to the original
position and relax
lie down on your
[Music]
back please
note women in advanced stages of
pregnancy to not practice this
[Music]
Asen Pavan
mtasa Bend both the knees and bring the
thighs to the chest interlock the
fingers and clasp the shin below the
knee raise the head and shoulders try to
touch the knees with the chin
chin this is Pavan
massan this removes
constipation gives relief from
flatulence and tones up the back muscles
and spinal
nerves bring your head
back
exhale stretch your
legs and relax
avoid this practice in case of abdominal
injuries hernia chatica and during
pregnancy
shavasan shave means the dead
body this Asen is meant for complete
relaxation lie down on your back with
the arms and legs comfortably
apart Palm facing
upward eyes
closed relax the whole body
consciously become aware of natural
breath and allow it to become rhythmic
and
slow remain in this position till you
feel refreshed and
relaxed this Asen helps relieve all
kinds of
tensions and gives add to both the body
and the
mind it is very beneficial in the
management of stress and its
consequences
[Music]
kapti it and stimulates respiratory
centers in the frontal
brain sit in any meditative posture
close the eyes and relax the whole
body inhale deeply expand the chest
expel the breath with forceful
contractions of the abdominal muscles
continue active exhalation and passive
inhalation
[Music]
then take a deep
breath exhale
slowly and
relax this is one round of
kapalabhati each round should be
followed by deep
breathing now do two more rounds
[Music]
kapalabhati purifies the frontal air
sinuses helps to overcome cough
disorders it is useful in treating colds
rhinitis sinusitis asthma and bronchial
[Music]
infections please avoid this practice in
case of cardiac conditions high blood
pressure vertigo migraine stroke hernia
and gastric
ulcers
pranay nard or anulom vom
pranayam is alternate breathing through
the the left and right
nostrils sit in a meditative
posture keep the spine straight and the
head erect with eyes closed relax the
body with a few deep
[Music]
breaths keep the left palm on the left
knee in Gan
mudra the right hand should be in the
nasik kagra mudra
place the right thumb on the right
nostril breathe in from the left
nostril close the left
nostril exhale through the right
nostril next inhale through the right
nostril close the right
nostril and exhale through it left
nostril
[Music]
this is one round of nard Shana or
anulom vom pranayam repeat for another
five
[Music]
rounds for beginners the duration of
inhalation and exhalation should be
equal gradually make it 1 is to two
inhalation
exhalation the breath should be slow
steady and controlled the main purpose
of this pranayama is to purify the
principal channels of
energy this nourishes the whole body it
induces
Tranquility helps to improve
concentration it increases
vitality and lowers the level of Stress
and
Anxiety it also elevates cough
[Music]
disorders bramar
pranayam Brar means a black bee during
the exhalation of this pranayam the
sound produced resembles the buzzing of
a black
bee inhale deeply through both
nostrils exhale
slowly in a controlled manner making a
deep steady humming sound is that of a
black
[Music]
bee this is one round of bramar repeat
two more
[Music]
times this is a great
tranquilizer it's found good in the
management of stress related disorder
this
[Music]
one now do the bramar with shanmuki
mudra close your ears with your thumbs
place the four fingers on your eyes
middle fingers on the nostrils ring
finger and small small fingers on the
lips open your nose and inhale through
both
nostrils exhale slowly in a controlled
manner making the Deep humming sound of
a black
[Music]
bee it is a useful reparatory pranayam
for concentration ation and
[Music]
meditation now let us prepare for
danan danan or meditation is an act of
continuous
[Music]
contemplation sit in any meditative
posture keep your spine comfortably
erect hold ganam mudra keep your palms
facing upwards upon the
thighs arms and shoulders should be
loose and
relaxed close your eyes and sit with a
slightly upturned
[Music]
face you need not
concentrate just m
a mild Focus between the eyebrows and be
conscious of your
breath danan keeps the Mind calm and
quiet it increases concentration memory
Clarity of thought and
willpower it rejuvenates the whole body
and mind giving them proper
rest it helps to develop positive
emotions meditation
leads to selfrealization
continue to be in this state of d
[Music]
oh
let us now take
some I commit to make myself into a
health y peaceful joyful and loving
human
being through every action of M I will
strive to create a peaceful and loving
atmosphere around me I strive to break
the limitations of who I am right now
and include the entire world as my
own I recognize the kinship of my own
life with every other life I recognize
the unity of all there
[Music]
is end the yoga practice session with
Shanti part or Universal prayer
[Music]
NAD
om
Shanty
Shanty shanty
[Music]
e e